# Sarah Williams Perkins

In far away South Wales at Lantwet, May 23. 1860, I was born. The daughter of
Evan and Mary Davis Williams, and sixth child in a family of twelve. My parents
joined the Mormon church before I was born. Father became dissatisfied and
finally left the church. Owing to my parents different religious opinions we
children were left to make our own choice in these matters. Most of my
associates being Methodists I naturally went to that church, very much to
Mother's disappointment. Occasionally myself and companions would stop at the
L.D.S. street meetings, but I was not impressed with their teachings.

My father and brothers were coal miners. Because of the life my father lived
and the particular kind of work he did, he was called "Evan the Saint," or
"Evan the Timber Man."

In 1871 he was placed in charge of a company of men and sent to Russia to open
some mines there. He remained there about two years. The extreme damp climate
caused him to develop asthma. We had doctors from far and near attend him, but
he gradually grew worse. Acting on the doctor's advice, he made preparations to
dispose of his property and said for America. The change of climate, they
thought, the only chance he had for regaining his health. He had never left his
chair for over a year and hand to be carried to the carriage to begin the
journey.

I can never forget the heart aches and strange feelings of emotion I felt in
preparing to leave the old home and associates. Among those hardest to leave
was a young man about my own age, for between us there existed a warm mutual
friendship. He accompanied us a number of miles on our journey.

My minister was much concerned about my going to Utah and warned me repeatedly
to keep away from the Mormons. He presented me with a hymn book and Bible to
keep me "going right."

We set sail from Liverpool in 1878, surrounded by relatives and friends many of
whom we were never to see again in this life. With heavy hearts and wet eyes
the last adieus were said, and we were speeding on our way to America.

We were on the ocean eleven days. Father's health began to improve at once and
he gained rapidly. While making the ocean voyage I had my first real contact
with the Mormons, there being a number of missionaries and converts among the
passengers. Being a lover of music, I was attracted by their fine singing and
enjoyed especially their hymns.

When land was sighted all was bustle and excitement. Though I was eager to be
off the water I perhaps would have felt more of a thrill in landing had I not
had the misfortune of losing my hat in the ocean while standing on the deck.
Knowing I would have to choose between going into New York bare headed or use a
handkerchief as a substitute for a hat I chose the latter way.

I had carefully saved my money to spend in America, but found to my humiliation
I could have spent it with much more ease in my native land. Though I talked
some English it was very embarrassing to talk to those who understood no Welch.
After spending a day and night at the depot where accomodations were prepared
for immigrants, we took the train for Salt Lake City.

We were met at York (a small town near Salt Lake) by my sister Mary Ann and her
husband, who had been in America about ten years. Our journey was now to be
made in a covered wagon, the first I had ever seen--an awful way to travel, I
thought. My first breakfast in Utah, I shall never forget. So strange, I
thought, to have cake for breakfast, but to my surprise the cakes proved to be
bread--baking powder bisquits, the first I had ever seen. We went immediately
to Cedar City, arriving there July the first.

Oh what a place. Everything was so different from my Welch home. But in spite
of the strangeness and newness of conditions I enjoyed the Fourth of July
celebration.

In time the barrier began to break down and life seemed more bearable. In less
than six months father and my brothers had made adobes and built us a
comfortable home.

To help out in our new conditions I went out to do domestic work. My first job
was at the home of David Davis. I took dishes and furniture for pay.

Another trial I had was becoming to the American way of cooking. Custard
pudding was strictly an American dish as far as I knew. I had watched Mrs.
Davis prepare the same, so upon being told to make one proceeded to do so
without asking any questions. I beat up a dozen eggs added sugar and nutmeg and
placed in oven to cook. Imagine my humiliation on being told I had left out the
milk.

As the Mormon church was the only church in Cedar, I must go to that or none at
all. Dancing being about the only amusement I must also learn to do that; an
art I knew nothing of, as dancing was forbidden in the Methodist Church.

In the summer of 1879 a call came from the head of the Mormon Church for
volunteers to go to San Juan to begin a settlement there. My brother-in-law,
Benjamin Perkins, was among the volunteers. I was persuaded to go along to help
take care of my sisters children. Imagine my surprise and indignation when but
six miles from Cedar I had the lines of one of the teams put in my hands and
was told that was my team and wagon to drive. An experience I had never before
had. It was expected that the trip would be completed in about six weeks time.

The journey was begun in November, with eighty wagons and about (150?) people.
As the journey continued it was found the trip would be much longer than at
first anticipated so teams were sent back to Escalante for provisions. Travel
was very slow as roads had to be made as we went. Although we had to put up
with many inconveniences and unpleasant situations I thoroughly enjoyed the
trip and was deeply impressed with the lives and actions of those with whom I
traveled. There was something different about them. Could it be their religion?
As I considered it more, I became convinced it was, and began to investigate
their teachings.

There were a number of good singers and musicians in the company and many a
pleasant hour was whiled away singing and dancing by the light of the moon or a
camp fire, on the sand or on slick rock. As far as I remember there was no ill
feelings, deaths or serious sickness on the journey, and all shared alike at
the table. When we wanted something a little extra for supper "lumpy dick" and
molasses was the dish----a mush made from stirring flour into boiling water.

When we neared the Colorado River, we found it solid rock down the steep
cliffs. We camped here for six weeks; giving the place the name of the "Hole in
the Rocks."

In crossing the Colorado the animals were made to swim across, the wagons and
provisions were taken over on a ferry boat. After crossing the river the
country became rougher, feed and water scarcer. The stock became so poor that
travel became difficult, making it impossible to cover more than a few miles
some days. Whenever a good supply of was was found camp was made a general wash
day held. We arrived at what is now known as Bluff on April 6, 1880.

My feelings I think were similar to Sister Clara Young's when they landed in
Salt Lake. I didn't see anything there to stop for, nor could I see how it was
possible to take a town in such a place. How thankful I was I didn't have to
make my home there. The men erected brush shed, these and wagon boxes were the
only shelter we had that summer.

There was no time for building as crops must be planted and ditches made. The
longer I lived among these people, the more convinced I became that Mormonism
was the religion for me. I entered the waters of baptism in the fall of 1880. I
was baptized in the San Juan River, by C.E. Walton Sr. The same fall I returned
to Cedar City. The following year my sister and her husband came home on a
visit. On October 28, 1881 I became the plural wife of Benjamin Perkins. We
were married in the St. George Temple. This was during the Crusade, so for
safety sake it was necessary for us to make the journey under the cover of
night. After returning from St. George I made my home with my husband's sister.
Here I had the opportunity of taking part in from prayers--the first time I
ever prayed vocally.

My parents were very much opposed to me entering polygamy, in fact they warned
me if I did I should never be allowed to come home again. When father found I
was willing to sacrifice home, parents, and all for the religion I had accepted
he left home, saying that he could not bear to meet me after going so contrary
to his wishes. It was several years before I saw him again. Though I had been
forbidden to return home, I did so repeatedly only to have the door shut in my
face and to be told there was no place there for me. Hard as all this was to
bear I felt in my soul that I had made no mistake and that they would be made
to see they were in the wrong.

In the early part of November we returned to San Juan. As a fortification
against the Indians a fort had been built, during our absence. Living in the
fort we came in very close contact with one another, some very close family
ties were formed, and the children played together almost as one big family. As
conditions became more settled and the Indians more peaceable, the fort was
abandoned and more homes built. The new life I had chosen brought with it
trials as well as joys, and I was never quite able to throw off the sorrow
ocassioned by the attitude my parents had taken. Words cannot express the
relief and comfort that came to me in a letter from Father some months later
expressing his and mother's regret for the course they had taken. They bade me
welcome home. Owing to the difficulty in obtaining water for farming, also
trouble with the Indians stealing and driving off stock, some of the settlers
became dissatisfied and felt the task was bigger than they could handle.

A visit from some of the church authorities resulted in their releasing all
those who wished to go, with the promise that those who left should be blessed
and those who remained doubly blessed. I have lived to see these promises
literally fulfilled. Bluff became known as one of the wealthiest towns for its
size in the United States. Not only was it blessed with wealth, but it grew
spiritually, having at one time thirteen missionaries in the field. We were
among those who left and returned to Cedar City. Not being able to secure
farming land here, my husband moved to Wayne County, leaving me on the Cedar
Mt. to run a dairy. In the late fall my brother Will accompanied me to Beaver,
where I expected to exchange my cheese and butter for woolen goods and other
supplies. While on the desert we had the misfortune of breaking a wheel off the
wagon, to add to this trouble we were caught in a raging blizzard and snow
storm, with no means of making a fire. Will managed to make a cart with the
front wheels and running gears. We traveled in this fashion for about ten
miles. We reached a cowboy's shack but I and my infant daughter were almost
frozen to death, had it not been for the help and kindness of the cowboys I
feel that we likely would have perished.

The following spring I joined my husband in Wayne Co. In 1884 there had begun a
specially persecutive assault on the Latter Day Saints, particularly aimed at
those who lived in plural marriage. Owing to this condition we were never quite
at ease and in the spring of 1889 my husband was imprisoned in the Utah
Penetentiary, kept there six months and fined three hundred dollars. This
prison life was no strain upon his character, but proved his fidelity, to his
conviction of right. During his confinement at the penetentiary I made my home
at Hanksville with some friends by the name of Wrights. Their kindness and
consideration shall ever be remembered with the deepest gratitude.

During those trying days I made to sense fully the meaning of the words "A
friend in need is a friend in deed." Life would have been bitter indeed without
the association and help of those kind friends who came to me in time of deep
trouble. After my husband's release we moved again, to Mancos, Colorado. My
husband remaining in Bluff with his other family. My stay in Mancos was short;
returning to Bluff about 1892. Farming conditions being so much more favorable
at Monticello, my husband moved there, leaving me at Bluff. I raised a family
of ten children--nine girls and a boy. As life is always hard in a new country
we were often taxed to the limit to know how to provide food and clothing for
our children. Life was especially hard for me, being left alone so much of the
time with my small children. Many times I felt like giving up in despair,
especially in times of sickness. Having to depend entirely on the priesthood
and the help of the neighbors, there being no Doctor nearer than ninety or a
hundred miles.

Many were the trying times we had with the Indians. Not only would they pilfer
and steal, but threaten to take our lives if denied things they asked for. At
one time I had an Indian boy chop me some fire wood promising him bread for his
work. When the wood was chopped he refused the bread and demanded money. I had
no money so could give him none, he goes away in a rage but soon returns with
his father, a Ute chief Mancos. I explain to the father but he insists that I
give the boy money as I promised saying his boy "no lie." They declare if I
didn't, when my and my papooses go to sleep they will come and burn the house
down.

Often I have been warned of danger. I recall in particular one morning while in
Sunday School I felt impressed to return home. I could see to reason for doing
so as I had my children with me and could think of nothing at home needing my
attention, but the warning came repeatedly and so clearly I could not disregard
it. On reaching home I found an Indian in the act of carrying off what few
provisions I had.

Besides caring for my family I did a good deal of work for the neighbors to
help my husband in his task of providing for his big family. I also made most
of my furniture I had from goods boxes and I think I was as proud of what I had
as many a young matron is today of her upholstered set. My first screen door I
made from coffee boxes. More than one stranger stopped to ask if I sold coffee,
seeing the writing "coffee" on the door, they mistook it for a sign.

My children's Christmas was quite different from the Christmases of today. One
year, by washing, I had obtained enough yarn to knit each child a pair of
woolen stockings to be their only present. After hours and hours of knitting
they were completed, washed and hung out to dry. When no one was looking one of
our dusky neighbors helped himself to every pair and the children were left
without any Christmas. I can't think of those days of severe trial without
recalling the bishop Jense Nielson, who was ever solicitous of our welfare.

One of my most trying times came when my twin girls were born. They weighed at
birth two and one half, and three pounds. For nine months we despaired for
their lives. Our lights were never out and for weeks at a time I didn't have my
clothes off. At another time my daughter Alberta, was severely burned and but
for God's goodness she could never have lived.

About the year 1913 my husband felt that he could more easily provide and
assist in rearing my family if we were living in the same town with him.
Accordingly we were called to again establish ourselves in a new home, at
Monticello. This however proved not to be the hard ordeal that myself and
daughters had felt it would. Many of the people we found were old
acquaintances. We found ourselves among friends and relatives instead of in a
land of strangers.

Many and varied are the experiences I have been called to pass through. While
some of tested my courage severely, I have never doubted God's wisdom. I have
buried my husband, my only son and his wife and a daughter; both son and
daughter leaving four little children. I am now in my 70th year and my
testimony of the Gospel's the most prized of all my possessions.

* * *

* 12 Oct 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown) by Daniel Esplin.
