1855  
Dumbarton Castle 7th Nov

My Dear Brother:

I hope you will excuse my carelessness in not writing to you before this. The
first reason was I did not have your address and after D. Annand sent it I
thought it was so vague that a letter so addressed would never find you.
Moreover, I have been shifting about from place to place, and when one is
rather lazy, at any rate very little sufficeth for an excuse. So now, my dear
brother, I will make no more apologies, but trusting to your usual good nature
begin to give you an account of myself, your brothers and sisters, and our late
father's effects.

With regards to myself you know that I was married in Ireland in '48, and I was
promoted to Sergeant the following year and to Company Sergeant in February
1854. In April of this year I applied and was transferred to the Fife Militia
Artillery, in which I am now stationed in Dumbarton Castle. It is situated on
the Clyde about 15 miles west from Glasgow. We have only one boy 2 1/2 years
old. I named him after our lost brother William. He is a fine little fellow
just like what you were yourself at his age.

I suppose that you are aware that William went to Australia in June '52 and
landed after a very good passage out in Melbourne where he worked a month. He
then wrote the only letter we have ever received, on the eve, he said, of his
departure to the Diggings where he purposed staying a month when he would write
home again, but from that day to this we have never heard anything of him
except that the man he worked with sent home word that he subsequently returned
for his tools and left again. He has been advertised and enquired for but we
have never got any tidings of him up to this date, nor do I think ever will.

When our father died I was out on an out-command from Devonport in England and
besides being at a great distance I could not possibly get away at the time so
as to be in time for the funeral. D. Annand wrote to say that they had drawn
the money to save the income tax, somewhere about L 100, also that the houses
were offered for sale at an upset price of L 200. Subsequently, he wrote to say
that the house could not be sold with out the authority from William or some
certain word what had become of him. From that time until I joined the Militia
I heard no more either of the money or the houses. But soon after my arrival in
Cupar (Fife), I took a trip north to see how the land lay. I expected they
would have volunteered an account of the whole affair, but no, I came away as
wise as I went. I again paid them a visit in a few weeks after, and Isabell
told me that they had paid the funeral expenses out of the money and divided
the remainder amount them, that is, George, Elizabeth and Isabell. Up to that
time I thought the money had been put past until the houses could be sold and
then the whole divided according to our father's will. So between you and me, I
think we have not been very well used among them, for they could have written
and had an answer back from me in 4 or 5 days at the longest. Bell further told
me that her husband D. Annand had the papers in his possession since our
father's death but now they were to put them into Thomas Webster's hand and let
him take charge of the houses. Still the rent must be running on all this time
and I suppose they are taking that also. At all events they seem to be taking
what they can get and leaving us to look after the remainder.

Now my Dear Brother, I want you to send me word how we ought to proceed and
whether I ought in our names, to put it in the hands of a man of business, or
not.

George and his family, Elizabeth and her family and Bell and hers are all well
and apparently doing well. You must excuse me for not sending you the news
about other acquaintances. I have been so long away that I know but very little
about them or indeed our nearest relations.

My wife joins me in sending our kind love to you, hoping this will find you in
the enjoyment of good health as it leaves us, thank God, and I remain,

Your Affectionate Brother

David Esplin

    When you write please address
    as under: Co. Sergt. D. Esplin
    Fife Militia Artillery
    Dumbarton Castle, Scotland

* * *

* 15 Sep 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown) by Daniel Esplin. The original link identified David as the "brother of John Esplin who joined the church."
