# Funeral Services of John James Esplin

                    Held at Orderville, 3 January 1937

    Conducted by:  Joseph Jorgensen, second counsellor to Bishop Rulon
                   J. Carroll.
    Song by choir: Oh Star Divine
    Invocation:    Alfred R. Meeks of the stake high council
    Trio:          A Perfect Day sung by Willard, Thomas Lavoy and
                   James Esplin, grandsons
    Speaker:       Henry W. Esplin, brother
    Violin solo:   Sing Me To Sleep by Howard Spencer
    Solo:          The Lord is My Shepherd by Leonora Spencer,
                   granddaughter
    Speaker:       Fred G. Carroll of the stake presidency, brother-
                   in-law

Joseph Jorgensen made a few remarks and paid tribute to Father and his family
for the good record they had made. He said Father had hitched his wagon to a
star and had won the race. His work in the temple was a fitting end to "A
Perfect Day". He had just gone home

* * *

Frant relates:

When Father first started as an ordinance worker in the St. George Temple it
was very difficult for him. He became very nervous and upset, almost to the
point of giving up in despair. I came through St. George on my way to take
supplies out to our sheep herd below Bunkerville. I stopped to see Father. I
told him it would do him good to get away awhile. he went with me to the sheep
herd and had a change of mind for a while. The brethren in the temple
encouraged him and were patient with him. He finally overcame his nervousness
and was able to do his part well. he was very thankful to Jeter Snow, Brother
Whitehead and others for helping him. He was thankful that he did not give up
and quit. He enjoyed very much his two years as temple ordinance worker. He
spent ten more years doing work for the dead in the temple. After he lost his
two wives temple work proved a great solace to him.

* * *

* 13 Nov 1993 - Typed by Valery Evensen.
* 17 Jun 2000 - Manually converted to html by Mark Esplin.
* 18 Sep 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown) by Daniel Esplin.
