# ELEANOR ANGELINE HOYT

Was married the same time as Israel Esplin and Chastie Stolworthy

* * *

Eleanor A. Hoyt, daughter of Josiah M. Hoyt and Mary Ellen Meeks Hoyt. Born Dec
18, 1884, Orderville, Kane County, Utah. Blessed Dec 1884 by Josiah Miller
Hoyt, Baptized Jan 4, 1893, by Carmi Nephi?. Confirmed Jan 4, 1893 by Thomas
Blackburn.  married to Joseph Jorgensen at St. George temple by David Cannon.
Died August 1, 1937.

December 4th was a cold windy day, but for all that we, I mean Joseph and I, my
cousin Israel Esplin and his betrothed wife Miss Chastie Stolworthy started for
the warmer clime St. George. After three days travel we arrived safe and sound
in the noted city about 9 o'clock p.m. after riding about town and inquiring at
every house, we found Edward Pugh's. They were looking for us, and gave us a
hearty welcome and something good to eat for which we were very thankful. The
Temple not opening till Tuesday, we had Monday to prepare for our work in the
Temple. Tuesday morning dawned bright and clear and our young hearts were
gladly beating, thinking of what was to take place that day, that would seal
their plight for life. Never will we forget the Holy and Heavenly feeling that
came over us as we entered that Grand and Beautiful house of the Lord. WE were
married by Brother David Cannon, a man who's looks would tell you that he was a
man of God. He was always smiling and happy.

We stayed and worked in the Temple two days, then started for our home, Dec
11th. we did not travel so fast coming back and did not arrived here till
Monday, Dec 15th. Found my father, Josiah M. Hoyt, very ill for which we were
very sorry. (A few weeks later Josiah passed away leaving two wives and two
large families.)

On Dec 25 we gave our wedding reception. Dinner at four p.m. for the older
folks. Dance and supper at night for the young folks. Had an excellent time.

    Eleanor Angeline Hoyt

* * *

* 16 Nov 1993 - Typed in WordPerfect Format by Valerie Evensen.
* 30 Nov 2003 - Converted to html and added comment at top by Mark Esplin.
* 25 Sep 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown) by Daniel Esplin.
